Purpose of the various framework stylesheets

Eric Meyer's CSS Reset
I use Eric Meyer's CSS Reset to reset default browsers' styles. Any reset should be fine though.

There seems to be some argument from the web community about whether to use a reset or not. At the very least I think I would always use the * {padding: 0; margin: 0} reset, although I have read that this can cause issues with form styling. I think most of the issues can be resolved by using a reset that you know and understand.

Layout
Sets up defaults for a centred, elastic layout, with a maximum width the width of the user's browser and a sticky footer (i.e. a footer that is at or below the bottom of the browser, depending on the amount of content).

Image Gallery
One of a number of widget style sheets, CSS files that control a specific functionality. This one creates a gallery of images, floated side by side, which increase in size when hovered over.

There is an argument that says you should not use CSS to control behaviour, just as you wouldn't use Javascript to style a page. For me, this style sheets proves that point. It runs like your grandma. And it would require some Javascript to get the same functionality in IE 6 and below (which doesn't support the :hover psuedo-class on anything but a link). Don't use it. Look into a Javascript framework if you want to produce similar functionality quickly.

Link Helper
A simple script that places icons next to links, based on there href attributes. It uses advanced psuedo-classes and hence requires a Javascript file to produce the same functionality in IE 6 and below (not sure about IE 7).

Specific icons can be used. Make sure to change the padding on the overall selector to the size of your icons.

Icons provided by Fam Fam Fam.

Tabbed Navigation
Another widget stylesheet, this one sets up hooks creates tabs from list-items.

Typography Helper
This script uses modern psuedo-selectors to add some typographic flair to a page. This includes transforming the first line of content to uppercase, adding a drop-cap to the first letter of some content and adding curly quotes to each paragraph of a blockquote.

A Javascript that mimics this functionality for IE has yet to be written.

Tables
Sets up some default styling for tables.

Vertical Rhythm
A framework for the vertical rhythm of lines. The rhythm is set up on the body selector (could be changed to a div selector, basically where you want the rhythm to begin) by establishing a base font size, bottom margin and line-height.  The values are then cascaded down to paragraphs, headings and lists.

Will not work in IE.

